---
title: Reply
author: [CL_AT_PerryJPickhardtMD]
date: 2010-10-01 00:00:00 +0700 +07
categories: [Academic Radiology, Volume 17, Issue 10]
tags: [Journals,General Radiology]
---
I thank Drs Soetikno and Kaltenbach for their interest in our work and appreciate the opportunity to clear up the many areas of misunderstanding, which I will address in the order broached in their letter.

First, Drs Soetikno and Kaltenbach were unclear as to which “recent endoscopic experience” we were referring to with regard to the relative proportion of flat versus polypoid lesions. To clarify, we were referring to their own work , which showed that 11% of all detected lesions were flat (ie, superficially elevated), quite similar to the figure of 13% in our computed tomographic colonographic study. Of note, our results held up when a much more rigorous definition for flat or nonpolypoid morphology was applied (height ≤ 3 mm) compared to that used by Soetikno et al. (height less than half the lesion width). Our results are not ambiguous: flat or nonpolypoid colorectal lesions in our screening cohort were much less likely to be neoplastic, histologically advanced, or malignant compared to the much more common polypoid lesions of a similar size. Among nonpolypoid colorectal neoplasms (NP-CRNs), only the carpet lesions (ie, ≥3 cm) appear to be worthy of close attention. Even so, these laterally spreading tumors are still much less aggressive histologically than their counterpart polypoid and masslike lesions of a similar large size .

Second, I would disagree that the nonpolypoid lesions described by Soetikno et al require optical colonoscopy for diagnosis. To reiterate and quote from their work, because “completely flat lesions are exceedingly rare,” the terms “flat” and “nonpolypoid” in their study strictly referred to “superficially elevated lesions,” which are detectable by either optical or virtual endoscopic techniques . Unfortunately, this message was lost somewhere in the translation to the lay press, which largely assumed that the study by Soetikno et al. referred to truly nonraised lesions. Furthermore, the general message was somehow misinterpreted to the effect that flat lesions were very common, more dangerous, and not detectable by computed tomographic colonography, none of which seems to be true.

Third, gastroenterologists were clearly well aware of the existence of NP-CRN prior to the _JAMA_ publication by Soetikno et al , as there had been previous flat polyp “scares” in the1990s. As with the current hysteria, it took the likes of thoughtful physicians such as John Bond to rise above the rhetoric and frame the issue in the proper context.

Fourth, I agree that prevalence data are very important, and we have published such results for a variety of colorectal and extracolonic findings on computed tomographic colonography . Of note, Drs Soetikno and Kaltenbach incorrectly cite the Clinical Outcomes Research Initiative data in describing a high prevalence of flat adenomas ≥ 6 mm. In fact, the prevalence of all polyps ≥ 6 mm in this large cohort (including nonadenomatous lesions) was 16% , which is similar to our own experience and to other recent screening data . The great majority of these lesions were undoubtedly polypoid and not flat. Perhaps the confusion comes from the inclusion of insignificant diminutive tubular adenomas, because the total prevalence of adenomas of any size was 26% in the Clinical Outcomes Research Initiative experience, with the majority of course being diminutive in size. In general, the relative importance of both diminutive and flat lesions has been grossly exaggerated in recent years. In the end, clinical outcomes should be the real focus, not fear mongering and rhetoric to promote confusion in terms of how best to screen for and prevent colorectal cancer.

Of perhaps greatest concern to me is the glaring disconnect related to the current focus on quantity (high yield of innocuous lesions) versus quality (cost-effective and clinically efficacious colorectal cancer prevention). Technological advances may allow us to uncover vast numbers of previously unrecognized colorectal “lesions,” but there is no real evidence that these efforts are worth the added costs, complications, and irrational fear.

## References

- 1\. Pickhardt P.J., Kim D.H., Robbins J.B.: Flat (nonpolypoid) colorectal lesions identified at CT colonography in a US screening population. Acad Radiol 2010; 17: pp. 784-790.


- 2\. Soetikno R.M., Kaltenbach T., Rouse R.V., et. al.: Prevalence of nonpolypoid (flat and depressed) colorectal neoplasms in asymptomatic and symptomatic adults. JAMA 2008; 299: pp. 1027-1035.


- 3\. Pickhardt P.J., Kim D.H.: Performance of CT colonography for detecting small, diminutive, and flat polyps. Gastrointest Endosc Clin N Am 2010; 20: pp. 209-226.


- 4\. Pickhardt P.J., Levin B., Bond J.H.: Screening for nonpolypoid colorectal neoplasms. JAMA 2008; 299: pp. 2743.


- 5\. Bond J.H.: Small flat adenomas appear to have little clinical importance in Western countries. Gastrointest Endosc 1995; 42: pp. 184-187.


- 6\. Pickhardt P.J., Kim D.H., Meiners R.J., et. al.: Colorectal and extracolonic cancers detected at screening CT colonography in 10 286 asymptomatic adults. Radiology 2010; 255: pp. 83-88.


- 7\. Kim D.H., Pickhardt P.J., Taylor A.J., et. al.: CT colonography versus colonoscopy for the detection of advanced neoplasia. N Engl J Med 2007; 357: pp. 1403-1412.


- 8\. Pickhardt P.J., Choi J.R., Hwang I., et. al.: Computed tomographic virtual colonoscopy to screen for colorectal neoplasia in asymptomatic adults. N Engl J Med 2003; 349: pp. 2191-2200.


- 9\. Boyce C.J., Pickhardt P.J., Kim D.H., et. al.: Hepatic steatosis (fatty liver disease) in asymptomatic adults identified by unenhanced low-dose CT. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2010; 194: pp. 623-628.


- 10\. Boyce C.J., Pickhardt P.J., Lawrence E.M., et. al.: Prevalence of urolithiasis in asymptomatic adults: objective determination using low dose noncontrast computerized tomography. J Urol 2010; 183: pp. 1017-1021.


- 11\. Lieberman D., Moravec M., Holub J., et. al.: Polyp size and advanced histology in patients undergoing colonoscopy screening: implications for CT colonography. Gastroenterology 2008; 135: pp. 1100-1105.


- 12\. Pickhardt P.J., Kim D.H.: Colorectal cancer screening with CT colonography: key concepts regarding polyp prevalence, size, histology, morphology, and natural history. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2009; 193: pp. 40-46.