---
title: Reply
author: [Christof Burgstahler MD,Stephen Schroeder MD]
date: 2011-03-01 00:00:00 +0700 +07
categories: [{Academic Radiology, Volume 18, Issue 3 SOURCE CL_S_AcademicRadiologyVolume18Issue3 1}]
tags: [Journals,General Radiology]
---
We would like to thank the authors for their comments regarding our article “Prevalence and Clinical Characteristics of Symptomatic Patients With Obstructive Coronary Artery Disease in the Absence of Coronary Calcification” .

As early as in 2003, our group published a paper in which we were able to demonstrate that the absence of coronary calcifications does not exclude the presence of noncalcified coronary plaques . Approximately 10% of patients without coronary calcifications presented with noncalcified plaques in this pilot study. These findings were confirmed in a study by Hausleiter et al in a cohort of 161 patients with an intermediate risk for having coronary artery disease. According to that study, the prevalence of noncalcified plaques in patients without coronary calcifications was as high as 6.2%, which was slightly lower than in our cohort. If we look more closely at the results of these studies, they accord very well with the published data concerning the prognostic value of coronary calcium scoring. There is no doubt that the absence of coronary calcifications is characterized by a very low cardiovascular event rate . However, the event rate in this population is not zero, which might be due to the rupture of a noncalcified plaque, for example.

Comparison of our recent data and the data presented in the letter remains challenging for several reasons. First, all our patients had the indication for invasive evaluation of coronary status irrespective of the results of cardiac computed tomography. Although we did not calculate the pretest probability (eg, using the Morise score), it might be assumed that most study participants had at least an intermediate risk for having obstructive coronary artery disease. Second, our results were based on the results of invasive angiography, not cardiac coronary angiography. This is of major importance, because cardiac computed tomography has a tendency to overestimate the degree of stenosis . Third, the Systematic Coronary Risk Evaluation of the European Society of Cardiology allows calculation of the risk for having a fatal cardiovascular event within the next 10 years. It might be applied to asymptomatic persons. Thus, the classification of symptomatic patients according to the risk calculated using that system is not adequate. However, the main result of our study and the data presented by Martin and colleagues is not affected by these considerations, namely, that symptomatic patients have a low but distinctive risk for having obstructive CAD even in the absence of coronary calcifications.

## References

- 1\. Drosch T., Brodoefel H., Reimann A., et. al.: Prevalence and clinical characteristics of symptomatic patients with obstructive coronary artery disease in the absence of coronary calcifications. Acad Radiol 2010; 17: pp. 1254-1258.


- 2\. Schroeder S., Kuettner A., Kopp A.F., et. al.: Noninvasive evaluation of the prevalence of noncalcified atherosclerotic plaques by multi-slice detector computed tomography: results of a pilot study. Int J Cardiol 2003; 92: pp. 151-155.


- 3\. Hausleiter J., Meyer T., Hadamitzky M., et. al.: Prevalence of noncalcified coronary plaques by 64-slice computed tomography in patients with an intermediate risk for significant coronary artery disease. J Am Coll Cardiol 2006; 48: pp. 312-318.


- 4\. Greenland P., Bonow R.O., Brundage B.H., et. al.: ACCF/AHA 2007 clinical expert consensus document on coronary artery calcium scoring by computed tomography in global cardiovascular risk assessment and in evaluation of patients with chest pain: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation Clinical Expert Consensus Task Force (ACCF/AHA Writing Committee to Update the 2000 Expert Consensus Document on Electron Beam Computed Tomography) developed in collaboration with the Society of Atherosclerosis Imaging and Prevention and the Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography. J Am Coll Cardiol 2007; 49: pp. 378-402.


- 5\. Meijboom W.B., Meijs M.F., Schuijf J.D., et. al.: Diagnostic accuracy of 64-slice computed tomography coronary angiography: a prospective, multicenter, multivendor study. J Am Coll Cardiol 2008; 52: pp. 2135-2144.